Make spirv.hpp be an external dependency (#813)
KhronosGroup/SPIRV-LLVM-Translator: CMakeLists.txt

set (BASE_LLVM_VERSION 12.0.0)
set(LLVM_SPIRV_VERSION ${BASE_LLVM_VERSION}.0)

include(ExternalProject)

# Download spirv.hpp from the official SPIRV-Headers repository.
# One can skip this step in case of EXTERNAL_SPIRV_HEADERS_DIR path is set.

> if (NOT DEFINED EXTERNAL_SPIRV_HEADERS_DIR)

Reviewer: I suggest that we re-use functionality provided by LLVM, i.e. we assume that SPIRV-Headers repo is an external project in terms of LLVM monorepo:

To check if it is available we use `LLVM_TOOL_SPIRV_HEADERS_BUILD` variable, which is automatically defined for us in  [llvm/CMakeLists.txt:127-131](https://github.com/llvm-project/llvm/blob/master/llvm/CMakeLists.txt#L127)

To get path to sources we use `LLVM_EXTERNAL_SPIRV_HEADERS_SOURCE_DIR` variable, which is either supplied by user, or if `SPIRV-Headers` project was put into `llvm/projects` subdirectory, then it is automatically set by LLVM in  [llvm/cmake/modules/AddLLVM.cmake:1355-1348](https://github.com/llvm-project/llvm/blob/master/llvm/cmake/modules/AddLLVM.cmake#L1355)

Reviewer 2: Done. I've ended up checking for `LLVM_EXTERNAL_SPIRV_HEADERS_SOURCE_DIR` definition directly, because that variable can be configured manually to point to an external headers' installation without `LLVM_TOOL_SPIRV_HEADERS_BUILD` being set.

>   message(STATUS "SPIR-V Headers placement is not defined. Will try to download
>           spirv.hpp frin github.com")

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  message(STATUS "SPIR-V Headers location is not specified. Will try to download
          spirv.hpp from https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Headers")
```

Author: Thanks, done!

  endif(CMAKE_SOURCE_DIR STREQUAL CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR)
endif (NOT DEFINED LLVM_SPIRV_BUILD_EXTERNAL)

# Download spirv.hpp from the official SPIRV-Headers repository.
# One can skip this step by manually setting
# LLVM_EXTERNAL_SPIRV_HEADERS_SOURCE_DIR path.
if (NOT DEFINED LLVM_EXTERNAL_SPIRV_HEADERS_SOURCE_DIR)
  if (LLVM_SPIRV_BUILD_EXTERNAL)
    set(LLVM_EXTERNAL_SPIRV_HEADERS_SOURCE_DIR
      "${CMAKE_CURRENT_BINARY_DIR}/SPIRV-Headers")
  else() # In-tree build
    set(LLVM_EXTERNAL_SPIRV_HEADERS_SOURCE_DIR

>       "${CMAKE_SOURCE_DIR}/projects")

Reviewer: Even though `llvm/projects` directory is listed in [`.gitignore`](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/llvm/.gitignore) in the upstream LLVM, I'm not sure that we should update it every time we do the build - I suggest downloading headers only to `build` area regardless of in-tree/out-of-tree setup

Reviewer 2: Done.

  endif()
  message(STATUS "SPIR-V Headers location is not specified. Will try to download
          spirv.hpp from https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Headers into
          ${LLVM_EXTERNAL_SPIRV_HEADERS_SOURCE_DIR}")
  ExternalProject_Add(spirv-headers
    GIT_REPOSITORY    https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Headers.git
    GIT_TAG           origin/master
    SOURCE_DIR        ${LLVM_EXTERNAL_SPIRV_HEADERS_SOURCE_DIR}
    CONFIGURE_COMMAND ""
    BUILD_COMMAND     ""

>     INSTALL_COMMAND   ""

Reviewer: Am I right that there are nothing to build in `SPIRV-Headers` project? Do we need to leave a comment here explaining why all those configure/build/install commands are empty?

BTW, is it possible to remove those options completely?

Reviewer 2: Removing these options results in the build system's attempt to use "default" commands for all these steps, which leads build failures precisely because there is nothing to build/install. I'll add a comment to explain this nuance.

  endif(CMAKE_SOURCE_DIR STREQUAL CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR)
endif (NOT DEFINED LLVM_SPIRV_BUILD_EXTERNAL)

# Download spirv.hpp from the official SPIRV-Headers repository.
# One can skip this step by manually setting
# LLVM_EXTERNAL_SPIRV_HEADERS_SOURCE_DIR path.
if(NOT DEFINED LLVM_TOOL_SPIRV_HEADERS_BUILD AND
   NOT DEFINED LLVM_EXTERNAL_SPIRV_HEADERS_SOURCE_DIR)
  set(LLVM_EXTERNAL_SPIRV_HEADERS_SOURCE_DIR
    "${CMAKE_CURRENT_BINARY_DIR}/SPIRV-Headers")
  message(STATUS "SPIR-V Headers location is not specified. Will try to download
          spirv.hpp from https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Headers into
          ${LLVM_EXTERNAL_SPIRV_HEADERS_SOURCE_DIR}")
  ExternalProject_Add(spirv-headers
    GIT_REPOSITORY    https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Headers.git

>     GIT_TAG           origin/master

Reviewer 4: Relying on the `master` branch assumes that the translator will always build with the latest upstream headers.  I'm not sure if that's always the case?  I wonder if we should instead rely on a known good revision of the spirv-headers repo, and maintain a SHA-1 somewhere (similar to what [SPIRV-Tools](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Tools/blob/a95bc460f924a9541dc3a85745dcb15140c8fcf3/DEPS#L9) does with its `DEPS` file)?

Reviewer 2: That's a good point, we could switch to using a hash. This should also include a mention in the docs for implementing extensions, i.e. a note about updating the hash after the developer's patch has been accepted into SPIR-V Headers. In a way, this could solve the maintenance problem, as the newer hashes of the SPIR-V Headers will have be tested with the translator sources by the extension developers, who could solve the unexpected build failures alongside their implementations.

Author: Agree

Reviewer 4: We will need to have a single point where we maintain that hash, because both CMakeLists.txt and github CI need it.  Unfortunately I do not have a good suggestion how to do so.

Reviewer 2: Fair point; I'll try and come up with something.

Reviewer 2: Done; switched to using a dedicated `.conf` file to read from both CMake and YML scrupts.

    SOURCE_DIR        ${LLVM_EXTERNAL_SPIRV_HEADERS_SOURCE_DIR}
    # Explicit specification of empty commands is needed to avoid "default"
    # configure/build/install commands being run by the build system.
    CONFIGURE_COMMAND ""
    BUILD_COMMAND     ""
    INSTALL_COMMAND   ""
    STEP_TARGETS      build
    COMMENT           "Downloading SPIR-V headers."
    LOG_DOWNLOAD      1
    LOG_UPDATE        1
    LOG_BUILD         1
  )
else()
  if(NOT DEFINED LLVM_EXTERNAL_SPIRV_HEADERS_SOURCE_DIR)
    set(LLVM_EXTERNAL_SPIRV_HEADERS_SOURCE_DIR
      "${CMAKE_SOURCE_DIR}/projects/SPIRV-Headers")
  endif()
  message(STATUS "Using SPIR-V Headers from
          ${LLVM_EXTERNAL_SPIRV_HEADERS_SOURCE_DIR}")
  ExternalProject_Add(spirv-headers
    SOURCE_DIR ${LLVM_EXTERNAL_SPIRV_HEADERS_SOURCE_DIR}
    DOWNLOAD_COMMAND  ""
    # Explicit specification of empty commands is needed to avoid "default"
    # configure/build/install commands being run by the build system.
    CONFIGURE_COMMAND ""
    BUILD_COMMAND     ""
    INSTALL_COMMAND   ""
    STEP_TARGETS      build

>   )

Reviewer: Could you please explain the idea of this branch in more details? Because it seems like I got confused. Particular questions I have:
- why do we need `ExternalProject_Add` here without download command? Do we assume that there is like 100% guarantee that required files are there where we expect them?
- why do we need to do any extra actions for `projects/SPIRV-Headers` path at all? I though that it will be picked up by LLVM automatically

Reviewer 2: > Why do we need ExternalProject_Add here without download command? Do we assume that there is like 100% guarantee that required files are there where we expect them?

What this command achieves is basically defining the `spirv-headers` target, which is used as a dependency for `LLVMSPIRVLib` from another branch. Even using the target_link_libraries approach from your [other comment](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-LLVM-Translator/pull/813/commits/92911948587adeac713ada01953080bc2dfdb47d#r662430738) would hardly resolve the need for defining this target - the download process still has to happen strictly before the `LLVMSPIRVLib` build/linkage.

> Why do we need to do any extra actions for projects/SPIRV-Headers path at all? I though that it will be picked up by LLVM automatically

If you're talking about the subbranch with `LLVM_TOOL_SPIRV_HEADERS_BUILD` defined, then unfortunately, LLVM does not define the path automatically. And there's still this point with the `spirv-headers` target requiring definition.

Reviewer: Ok, let it be that it requires re-definition, but what if there are no headers in expected location? Should we add some kind of check (like to at least check if directory exists or if there is a `CMakeLists.txt`) and report an error if there are no headers in expected location?

Reviewer 2: That's a fair point. Essentially, my logic has been that if `LLVM_TOOL_SPIRV_HEADERS_BUILD` has been defined, then the `CMakeLists.txt` presence has [already been checked](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/llvm/cmake/modules/AddLLVM.cmake#L1350-L1354) by `add_llvm_subdirectory`. I agree that a check for the assumption of the `llvm/projects` location is still needed, and a check for `LLVM_SPIRV_BUILD_EXTERNAL OFF` also wouldn't hurt in this context.
